I think by now you must have heard the news
that how DRDO and IIT Delhi
together have developed Quantum Secure Communication System,
using photons, the next generation
technology as we call it and
when I used to make these lectures, I myself used to think that I should know that
this technology has not yet
come to India, will people learn about it and
watch my videos or not but now it seems that
brother, those
videos which I used to make for lectures will become very important for you
and today I am going to explain this news also in great
depth in as
simple a language as possible but
I will not over simplify anything.
But I will try my best to
explain it in the best possible way.
First of all, this quantum secure communication
system or what have DRD and IIT Delhi
done together?  If I
want to tell you in short, what DRD and IT Delhi
did together that 100 Km from Prayagraj to Vindhyachal.
Information was transferred using light, rather than photos, over a distance of 1000 ohms without the use of fibre optics.
And how secure can this thing be?
What could be its applications?
And everyone is a
little bit scared of this word quantum.  I used to think so earlier too.
Today I will try to simplify it
and try to explain it.  The
secret behind this.  Come on, let's unlock it together.
First of all,
I have used the word secure too many times here.
So the first thing is that
in our digital world, all the things are not
locked.  Are digitally locked.  Be it the
banking system, bank details or
your secret messages.  And
this digital lock is put to
protect your information
, the word used for this is
encryption.  This word is going to be very useful for us today.
So I thought I should
note it down here.
You will remember this next time too.  The digital lock
by which your information is protected is
called encryption.   There are
many types of encryption systems.  If I
want to explain it in simple language then there is
some mathematical problem behind this.  So,
those people who used to say where is the use of maths?
Look brother, your information is secured.
Because of these math problems.  That means if
you want to break an encryption system,
you have to solve a math puzzle.
And these mathematical puzzles
are very difficult to solve.  Hey if it was easy then there would be an
encryption system for something,
right?  It is so very difficult.   It is
so difficult that even our
classical computers, even supercomputers, are
not able to break it.   For example, if I
want to tell you one thing, there is an RSA method.  The
RSA method means that we can
multiply two numbers
but factorization, which is the opposite process, is
very difficult.  If
I write a number here in front of you,
any 100 digit long number, it will take years for
our normal computer to find out its factors.  And if I
keep increasing the digits like this and
I write a number 200 digits long
and ask you to find out its factors.
It is an extremely difficult
task.  Even if I give you all the computer scientists
of the world, even then if 200 digit,
300 digit, such huge numbers are
involved, then there are just a few
things which if you remember and understand, then in the
future whenever you see such information, you will be
able to decode it yourself.  So this
is a quantum computer.  But as soon as we come to the game,
till now we believed that all the
mathematical puzzles are unbreakable.
These encryption systems can never end.
It can never be broken.
And that's where this brother quantum computer comes into the game
and
how is such estimation done?  It
is about to happen.  Understand this quantum computer like this,
it has a master key.  It
can open the lock of any door.
Can break any encryption system.
This problem which we thought was almost
impossible to solve, if we
fix a particular time
in which this problem has to be solved then
classical computers would not be able to do it.  This
brother will eat all that stuff.  It has
a master key.  You might think that
all encryption systems would be broken.
Because
maths is used here and the laws of physics come into play here.
It is based on the laws of physics.  There is
no mathematics here.  This is different in this.
Ok?  So the First World War happened
because of chemistry.  The second world war
happened because of physics.  The third world
war will happen because of mathematics.
Because when the encryption systems start getting broken,
this quantum secure communication system
which I am going to describe now, brother,
all its encryption systems can be
broken or we will have to take help from that country, which will
not be done by India, now
India is becoming the leader.  Now, those who have
not made the quantum
computer and do not have the technology, will have to
take services from now on, for example,
from USA, China, even from India, for
quantum secure
system, meaning such a system which
cannot be broken for the time being, i.e. a quantum
computer will break the old ones
but these
encryption systems that have quantum computers, it is impossible to break it. I am
using the word impossible, let me tell you
why, why is it so secure, secure,
I keep calling it secure, secure, again and again.
But what is that like?  Because it
is based on the rules of quantum mechanics.
You must have heard many properties in quantum mechanics.
Like
we have to understand three properties here.  One is that
we have superposition so that we
can go into it in more depth.  Isn't it?
I will tell you this news in so much detail
that brother, you can go and explain it to anyone
and anyone can ask you anything
about it.  You will be able to tell.  There is a
superposition, there is an entanglement.
Mainly these are the two things and we
also add quantum interference.  If we
understand all these things then it means
that brother, we have understood the complete news.
What did we use first?
Quantum Secure Communication System was developed
jointly by DRD and IIT Delhi.  What did he do?
Used the photos.  Now I haven't seen the photos
till today.  Yes.  Our
normal computer, on which I am recording right now, is
all
based on the language of one and zero.  Meaning, understand it like this, there are
small transistors or switches installed inside it.
Either
current will be flowing through it or it will not be flowing.  Either
it will be on or it will be off.  Understand it like this.
Ok?  Similarly, if there are two switches then
how many states and how many possibilities can I
explore?  To four possibilities.
A 0 1 0 1 1 If I have three switches like this then
I will be able to explore eight possibilities.  You
can try it yourself, is
n't it like this?  So something to the power of 2 is there.
Whatever number of off switches you have.
For example, we can also call it bits.
Whatever number of bits
you have, whatever its length is,
put it here.  If the length is three then 2 to the
power of 3 becomes eight possibilities.  But the
biggest problem with classical computers was
that classical computers were
based on sequential programming.  What I
mean to say is that they will explore one possibility,
then they will
explore the second one, then they will explore the third one, yes we
can fast up this process.  Yes
absolutely but think for yourself when
number 2 becomes 30 in power.  Sorry 2 to the
power of 20 represents greater than 1
million possibility.
Using just 30 switches I
can explore so many possibilities.   It
means that whenever you
tell your computer any particular thing, zero zero, it will do
this work and will write 'A'
on your screen.  If you give
one zero to your computer, it will write B
on your screen.  Up to so on can be used like this.
We will not go into those technicalities.
We are also interested in cryptography.  I want to
know this word.  So
how do we get the output from the computer
?  How is the input coming?  Understand now that
you don't even know what a computer is.
This is a black box.  Thats it.  Ok
?  There is a black box.  As soon as we
give it instructions, it will give
some output according to our instructions.  If we give the
instruction zero zero then it will
give some output.  Like that if I only have
30 sorry only 20 switches.
Brother, think about it.  More than 1 million,
possibility 1 million different outcomes I
can work out here.  Did you understand from this
?  That's why let's come back to photon and
quantum.  What happens in a quantum?
I told you about this.
what happens here?  There is sequential programming.
Yes, we can do it fast.   You
can definitely do it.  Sequential
processing will process whatever happens one by one.
Ok?  Just what happens here in quantum
?  Parallel
processing takes place here.  I mean,
what will he do?  Suppose there were 30 switches
then the number would be greater than 1 billion.
If there were 40 switches, see how fast the number is
increasing.  Because this number,
x to the power of 2, is what we call an exponential number.
Their growth is very fast.
Using just 30 switches we
can explore 1 billion possibilities.
But again we
can make our computers faster.  But still there will be
some limit as to how fast you
can make it.  It will do it one by one, yes,
in one second our computer can explore 1 billion such
possibilities,
still how much is 1 billion, nine to the power of 10,
one trillion, 12 to the power of 10,
suppose it has explored so many possibilities,
suppose this quantum computer can
explore so many properties, so many possibilities simultaneously, this is what the
mind gets lost in and this is what I would like to
explore further, that this photon, for the
first time, now the time has come to link both the things.
What will he do?  It can multiply
9 by the power of 10 in 1 second but
can do it only one by one.  If the number would have been like 10 to the power of
90, then if I had 300
bits, the number would have been 10 to the power of 90. Brother, there would
not have been that many atoms of 10 to the power of 90
in our universe.  This is such a big number.  Our
computer would explode.  Combine all the computers.
Reaching this number is an
almost impossible task given a time
frame.  come here.
Bhai sahib I am not saying all this at once for one second.
It can explore 90 possibilities to the power of 10 simultaneously.
Yes,
we have not made such efficient and good quantum computers yet, but we are not very
far away either.  Bhai sahib, this achievement is
very big.  Ok?  I hope you are
able to understand a little bit.  But
why Photon?  Because here we used,
I used the word transistors.
Read a little more about it,
we also study it in 12th class.  Ok?
About Transistors Gates.  But the photon
has no polarization.  There is a word called
polarization.
Polarization means
in which direction are its waves vibrating
?  There can be two types of polarization.  One
horizontal, one vertical.  But do you know
what the problem is?  This is where quantum
things come in.  Quantum means like
what happens here?  The transistor is either
in the on condition or in the off condition.  this is what
happens.  But here the photon will have
horizontal polarization.  I also
want to use the same properties.  I am sure that
I can replicate this.  I
can make something like this.  I want those two
possibilities, either this should happen or this should happen.
I named zero and one myself.  He
just became a place holder.  Zero and one.  0
Instead of one you could have written yes no.  You
could have written on off.  You could have written Rajan Veena.  Are you
able to understand the meaning?
Could write anything, anything.  The square was also broken.  Think about what
I said.  But you could have written anything in
its place.  Similarly, here the photos will have
two states, either they will be
vibrating horizontally, its
waves will either be vibrating vertically.
I just changed the symbol to zero state.
Correct?  And here it was named One State.
And if someday I write it like this,
na s = alpha0 + beta1, I thought I should
include some math.  I wo
nt do much.  Just one equation, nothing else.
If we assume that we have
written this equation in front of you, it
means that it is representing the state of the
system.
State of system or this time I
am talking about photon.
What do you mean by saying this?  What does
it mean to say photon?  I mean is the
state of photon one or two?  This is where the
rules of quantum come in.  They say that unless
you measure you wont be able to tell.
I can only tell you the probability,
so when I do alpha square
in my lectures, you will understand its technique,
why do we do the square?  In simple terms
alpha is the square probability that it will
come in zero state.  Beta squared is the
probability that it will land in one state.
I don't know before or after my measurement and this is true randomness.  True
Randomness: Even if you bring the zero state 1 lakh times,
after measuring, you will still
not be able to tell what is going to happen next, whether the
zero state will come or the one state will
come.  Well, I could have written it horizontally and
vertically also.  HB is just the name, you can
write anything.  If I have ever
written this, I think you will know
what I am trying to say.  If
I ever write something like this then what
I mean to say is that there is half probability
or 50% chance that it will come in zero state
and there is 50% chance that it will come in one state.
Not before my measurement but
I will be able to tell you.  Similarly here it could have been 75%.
Depending on how we have
captured that photon.  We have
imprisoned him in such a way that
we have increased his probability by 75%.  This
work of increasing and decreasing the probability is called quantum
interference.
My quantum computer is exploring the 90 possibilities to the power of 10, but
I need one correct answer out of them. So,
this is
a process in our quantum computer called quantum
interference, which in simple language means
increase the probability of your correct result and decrease those of the rest, the
rest can also get an answer, means the answer for 3 * 5
can also be 4, but the probability of getting 15 is
higher.  That is why our
quantum computers
may not be able to replace our normal computers.
Meaning I won't do it at all.  Normally
this is what we have.
This quantum computer is good for some specific types of tasks.
Because there is a possibility of getting wrong answer.
But there is a very high probability of getting the correct answer.
We call this
quantum interference.  Increase the probability of getting it right.
And this is the magic that
quantum algorithms do, in which I keep
making videos.  So do watch the lectures also.
One property is quantum
superposition.  What I just told you is that
before the measurement it was in the zero state as well as in the one state.  After
measuring I will know
in which state it is.  So this
means here I
can explore only one possibility at a time.  Either that
possibility will be either zero or
one.  Same but here both
possibilities can be explored.  And
let me tell you how this power of 10 90
can be explored simultaneously.  Now watch
because the second thing that's going to come up here is this
quantum entanglement.  Meaning, you
take two particles and entangle them.  For
example, hit him in simple language.
By the way, this process related to quantum entanglement is
very difficult.  But suppose
you took two photons or two electrons
and made them collide.  It is not necessary to
use the photon as a qubit.  The word I
can use here now is Qubit.   The
word I am going to use here is bit.
Bit means zero one.  Qubit means quantum
bit.  He can live in zero as well as in one.  It is
not necessary that you use photos.   You
can also use the electron, the
spin of the electron.  Either it spins up
or it spins down.  Well, this
analogy is not good.  But still.  Ok
?  Because quantum spin
cannot be visualized.  But
why did I choose Photon?  Because this brother
used photos and my personal
favorite quantum technology is photonic
quantum computing.  The error rate is
very low.  I will tell you all those things.
But if we come to quantum entanglement, then
in simple language quantum entanglement is that two
particles collide and become entangled.  If you
experiment on one, it will have an
impact on the other as well.  This means that if
you take each quantum bit, its
state can be zero one.  Horizontal
Vertical.
Zero One is just a name.  Like this, if
you take two particles, the states will become
0 0 1 1 0 1 1 so what is the difference between this and this
?  Nothing.  There is no difference
brother between classical and quantum.  The difference here is
that these are going to be processed sequentially.
And these possibilities are going to be
processed simultaneously.  Four possibilities
together and if I took the example of 200, sorry 300 300.
So if I
take 300 quantum bits and entangle them.  The
first property is quantum
superposition.  Secondly, I also entangled them with each other.
So how much possibility will there be
?  Almost 10 to the power 90 is being
explored simultaneously.  But I
want the result I want.  He
will give this.  So these are the three properties
which we had to understand and we understood them.
That is all.  This is the whole magic.  Whatever is
running inside any quantum computer,
you must have seen the Kiskit language, there is
a panel language, there is a Cirk
language of Google, sorry if I am pronouncing
Cirk wrong, if
they call it Kirk, whatever it is, but what have they
done behind this,
they have kept any syntax, that means if I am
writing some code in Kiskit language, then
what am I actually doing,
whatever syntax I have used, that syntax will be
read by the transpiler, the
transpiler of Kiskit language will read it
and convert it into machine language.
After converting it into machine language, we
will tell the machine that brother is trying to say this
and then it will perform a different task.
How will the tasks be performed?  Some
pulses are going to go away.  Try and understand this.  Are
these qubits photons
or electrons or are superconductors being
used or topological qubits
or trapped ions or what else are they
?  There are neutral atoms.   The
nucleus is used.
Some pulses are sent to all of them.
Pulses mean that some electric current is sent
to manipulate it.
According to the algorithm I have written,
it is manipulated accordingly and then
different tasks are performed.
Like I just told you.
But making a quantum computer that efficient is possible.
We are not very far away yet.
But at the moment we do
not have enough power to break all the encryption systems.
But such an encryption
system can be created as
mentioned here.  Let's move a little further.  So
I told you about entanglement.
And finally let's
move on to quantum cryptography.  In simple
terms, I thought that if I tell you then
one thing will become clear that brother,
this thing is really interesting.  And if I
want to tell you a little bit about
cryptography,
what actually happens in cryptography.
By the way I am talking about
directly quantum cryptography.  Now
people are even moving towards post quantum cryptography.  I mean first the mathematical
problem which we mean it is a funny thing.
Any quantum computer had to break a math problem, which meant that a math
problem had to be solved, which classical
computers were not able to do to break the encryption system.
Then came the
quantum computer which was based on the rules of physics.
Then now we come to post
quantum cryptography.  This is quantum
cryptography which is based on the laws of physics, the
laws of quantum physics.  And
this post quantum cryptography is
again mathematical problems which are
considered to be such mathematical
problems that most probably even our
quantum computer will not be able to break it.
Because once a quantum computer is made, it will
break all encryption systems.
Then we will
have to create some algorithms and some encryption systems
that can protect them from quantum computers.
Otherwise, the one who made the quantum computer will
destroy it. The
quantum computers will make the encryption systems of the entire world
clash with each other.
Then what can we do to save ourselves
if you don't want to use a quantum computer, then
this post quantum cryptography will require the
use of such an encryption system
that even a quantum computer cannot break. We will
explore a
very interesting thing in the upcoming lectures. So mainly we will
understand the distribution of this quantum,
what actually happens, understand it like this that
this is a factory and it makes
quantum coin, quantum coin means it
makes two entangled particles.  I have given a particle
for example, here I have a
friend Veena and here is Rajan.
Ok?  These are two people.  Obviously they
will be humans anyway.  But one coin went
to Rajan and one has to go to Veena.
But let's talk about me first.  I
measured the coin that came to me and the first coin came to me was
one.  It came on the second one.  Second, I did major,
then came forest.  Third, I measured photon.
Let us go from horizontal to vertical, if
we go from horizontal polarization, horizontal
polarization, then vertical, then horizontal,
then horizontal, and keep doing it like this, if I
call this one, this one, this 0 one one, then I
have one key, now where will the second coin go, what are
we
transferring, what are we
distributing, we are giving keys,
I will have one key, the other one will have one key,
then we will match it with the normal call
and we will have a secure system
and we do not even need to measure the entire key.
Just keep watching.  We do
n't need to tell the whole thing on the call.  If you
match a few four digits, your
work will be done and a secure system
can be built.  So what are we transferring with
light?  Password
Password sharing is in progress.  The
sharing work is currently in progress.  As soon as it is
shared, one goes to him and one goes to me,
then we can communicate.  So
what will happen now?  Suppose a coin was going from here
towards Veena and then an
Eve or a hacker came there.  What did he do?
From here he himself saw the photon and
he saw that it is horizontal.  The next one he
saw is vertical.  And what did he do?  As
soon as the measurement is done.  As soon as
he measured it, we had to send a total of 500 photos.
It got 495.  I got 500.
But this Eve saw five photons.   The
hacker noticed this and sent some more
quantum particles back here.  But for a
second, if we assume that it has done the
measurement on the quantum particle, then its state will become
fixed and neither will it get collapsed nor will it
function, meaning it is either
in horizontal polarization or in vertical,
but as soon as you measure it, it
falls into one, so it has seen that,
as soon as it sends any quantum
particle here again and Veena measures it, then it is
not necessary that it is the same as it was with
me, can you understand, the first particle has come
here.  Through this it measured
horizontal.  When it
sent another quantum particle here, it also
measured it horizontally.  Well, it was a guess.   It
was a coincidence.  Then he did another major.
Here comes the vertical.  Here also there was vertical at
number three, so there was a problem brother.  When
Veena saw this after making her sequence, it was
coming.  If only five photos were
shared from Let Us, then what would have come here: 1 1 0 1 1
?  0 0 1 0 0 What happens
to entanglement due to Just Opposite Entanglement
?  Whatever measurement you do on one particle, it will have an
effect on the other as well.
This was it, they are related to each
other.  So we saw that everything was fine.
But there is a problem with this part.
His forest is also coming here.  Forest is coming here also.
Should not have happened.  This means
someone has interfered.  So we will
start the process again.  This
is quantum secure.  Because it is
like a bubble now.  As soon as anyone
tries to touch that bubble, that
bubble will burst.  That bubble will burst soon.  So first assume that
it has measured a quantum particle.  If
another quantum particle is sent further, then
any possibility can come to it.
Now he is no longer entangled with it.  The
particles that were coming out of the factory earlier were
near this one and the ones that were going towards this one were
Enteng.  But as soon as Eve saw it,
as soon as the hacker saw it, it collapsed.
That entanglement is over.  Now
whenever he sends it here then there is no entanglement.
Now this will not happen, this is its forest.  Its
zero.  No, now that quantum particle, that
entangled one, did not go to it.  And
that is the main crux of what is happening here,
I am not applying quantum quantum but quantum to everything.  No Cloning
Theorem.  Now this no cloning theorem
tells us that you cannot make a replica of any quantum system.
Can never make an exact copy.  Like what happens right now
?  You went to a party, you went on a trip to your
friend, your friend took a
lot of pictures and you said, brother
send me those pictures, if you slap him
a couple of times, maybe he will give it to you,
but yes, you
can transfer those pictures to you, you can make a replica of
things, this cannot be done here, a copy cannot be made,
making an exact copy of anything is not possible,
this theorem restricts it, I have even proved it
in my previous lectures, but for
now, again just
keep this in mind that an exact copy of any quantum system
cannot be made.
I am not going to leave without telling the reason.  It
cannot be made
because to make a copy of anything, you will
have to measure it first.  Suppose there is a soap bubble.
You have to see how that soap bubble is made.
So first, we will have to experiment with that.
He will have to touch it also.  But
as soon as you touch it, that
bubble will burst.  I am just giving an analogy in the same way you
look at the bubble, this is a quantum bubble.
You
have to see it to make a complete replica of it.  We will have to look at each and every atom to see
how it is connected.   You will
have to look from the inside side also.  But
as soon as you touch it, that bubble will burst.  Same thing
happens here as well, as I don't
know whether the state is zero or one right now.  As
soon as I become Major, brother, the whole thing will be exposed.
Either zero will come or one will come.  The
collapsed wave function.  I am not going to use the word wave function right now.
By the way that will be a different
story.  But once I want to
replicate a quantum system,
I'll have to do measurements.   If
I do the measurements it will collapse.
Isn't it?  Hey, if you want to make a replica then you will
have to make its superposition also.  I have
this box.  There may be a head as well as a tail inside it.
And I want to
make a similar box.  There are many such head tail,
head tail coins lying around.  And I
want to create the same replica of it.  So first
I will have to go inside this compartment and see.  I will
have to do measurement on these coins too, but if I do the measurement then I will
lose this superposition property.  This
was the main problem that this is the main
secure system that I was just talking about
and as soon as we
try to match them with each other, then it will be detected
and here another team, another
term comes in if there is a mismatch
which we are trying to compare with each other.
So as soon as we have a mismatch,
here comes a term called percentage of
errors.
A term is used to describe the number of errors that occur: quantum bit error rate.
Note down the quantum bit error rate somewhere, if you
read the news again then you will
understand what it means.
And let us
assume that this quantum bit error rate is
high, then it means that somebody has created some trouble.  There
was some hacker
in between.  Someone was an e-dropper.  But if we
assume a little error is coming then it could be
that there was a problem in our communication system.
Now we have to
set some limit for this.  And as soon as
we confirm them with each other and there is a
mismatch, some error occurs
in between, so we start again.
That process of entanglement
starts again.  And the thief gets
caught.  Meaning the thief is not
caught.  We come to know that somebody has played some tricks
in between and
our secret key or the secret which we
wanted to send from one point to another by
trapping it in this light, will
still be safe; this is the main
thing we have and after this,
finally we come to this quantum
distribution, it is based on the
losses of quantum physics,
all these things are based on the losses of quantum physics, it has to be
kept in mind, what have IIT Delhi and DRDO
done together?  Free space
optical link.  Meaning, without any optical
fiber, I will add this term also.
Free Space
Optical Link simply
means that they have covered a distance of
100 Km using photons without using any fibre optics.  It has been
sent at a distance of.
Information has been sent from Prayagraj to Vidhyanchal.
And the best thing is that this
quantum bit error rate was extremely low
and this was also the biggest success.  There was very little
this error in it.  Errors are bound to happen.
We haven't made it that efficient yet.
And
one more term
comes to us about the security rate, the secure rate,
this was very high because of which
I said that it is a big success, a very
big thing, India is no longer just
for taking service.  Now he can also provide service.  What I
mean to say is that now we are
developing the technology that we have,
we are building a quantum encryption system.
Now we will not be dependent on anyone.
We have our own.  Now we will
not be afraid of China that it has made a quantum computer.
Quantum computers also
started being made.  By the way, I am going to make videos on that too in the
upcoming videos.  But now
we will not be afraid of this thing at least
that all our military or
defense
information which is confidential
or the banking system or finance
or the government's strategies or their
communication, none of it will be leaked.
If we use this method for
quantum secure communication,
these two organizations have finally demonstrated this quantum secure communication
and as I told you, after this,
people are now working on post quantum cryptography.
Post quantum cryptography
means new methods which
even quantum algorithms and quantum computers cannot break.  I
mean, for now,
physics here is guaranteeing that you are safe.
Your information is safe.  And
where did it go to us here?  Here in post
quantum cryptography,
mathematics is giving you a guarantee that
your information will remain safe.
Employ new methods.  I hope that
if you believe that we combine the two, then
all our encryption systems and the
government policies,
government strategies related to defense and
military, we have put a two-layer
system in it, one is post quantum
cryptography and one quantum cryptography,
brother, it will become such a system which will be
unbreakable, it will be impossible to break,
think about it, I hope that I will be
able to explain it a little and give an idea as to
what actually happened in the
quantum secure communication system or
what IT Delhi and DRDO actually did together, perhaps I would have been able to tell that.
See you in another video
with some other interesting topic.  Till then
, bye-b take care of yourself.